History is a discipline based on interpretation, debate, analysis, and synthe-
sis. Because of this, history essays are more than narrative accounts of the
past. The purpose of a history essay is to communicate useful conclusions
about past events in a purposeful and persuasive manner. History essays
that are mere narratives of historical events without being analytical are,
therefore, of limited value. Analytical essays are also called argumentative
ones, because you are trying (which is what essayer means in French) to
convince the reader of your point of view. The argument developed
throughout the paper must be persuasive, which means that it is supported
with evidence and analysis. This is not the same as an argument that is
merely asserted, which, though often written using confident language,
lacks evidence and analysis. In order to make your argument as objective
and persuasive as possible, use counter-arguments and counter-evidence
to show why your idea is the more correct one.
No matter what historians choose to study, our principal task is to under-
stand events with objectivity (without bias) and in relation to their proper
historical context, which is also known as empathy. This means examining
and explaining events of the past according to the beliefs, rules, and cus-
toms governing that society, rather than according to one’s personal be-
liefs, one’s own culture, or the modern world. For example, it would not
make sense to criticize a seventeenth-century absolutist government on the
grounds that it was not democratic, because the notion of democracy was
not established until much later. Such arguments are anachronistic, which
means imposing modern ideas on the past. This approach does not main-
tain historical perspective or empathy because people cannot be expected
to hold ideas that did not exist in their time.
Displaying objectivity and perspective also means not making moralistic
arguments or value judgments. We are often troubled by the amount of
violence in history and are shocked to learn about abuses of what we today
call human rights. Although statements about the particular immorality or
injustice of an individual or state are not always out of place in historical
essays, we must be careful to take into account the prevailing norms and
practices of the period in question. Your job is to explain how and why an
event occurred, not to criticize the fact that it occurred. It would be inap-
propriate to argue that the Spanish should not have conquered the Aztec
in the sixteenth century, because the simple fact is that these events did
happen. Objectively explaining events that seem amoral to you does not
mean that you morally agree with what happened, but rather shows that
you can understand these events in their proper, historical context.
3
Part I: The Pre-Writing Process
Writing a history paper requires much more than just sitting down at a
computer. It involves a lot of early planning, detailed research, critical
thinking, skilled organization, and careful writing and rewriting. The first
rule of essay writing is to start early so that you have plenty of time to
follow these steps. An essay that is hastily conceived, researched, orga-
nized, or written will inevitably be lacking in essential components, which
will always result in a lower grade.
Historical Method
Historians usually use the inductive rather than the deductive method when
writing essays. The inductive method involves moving from the specific (a
focused topic and research question) to the general, using fact- and inter-
pretation-based analysis of discrete historical evidence to arrive at conclu-
sions that reflect on phenomena beyond the topic under investigation. The
deductive method, by contrast, involves moving from the general (a hy-
pothesis, theory, or informed assumption) to the specific and arriving at
conclusions by testing the validity of the initial assumption. Although cer-
tain historians employ the deductive method (or a “top down” approach),
most employ the inductive method (or a “bottom up” approach) in order
to allow for an open-ended inquiry into their topic without preexisting as-
sumptions.
Finding a Topic
Sometimes your instructor will assign a specific topic for investigation and
provide the research materials that are necessary to complete the paper.
More commonly, you will be required to select your own subject and then
conduct a search for materials. The topic must be one that is interesting to
you. A topic that engages your interest will be more enjoyable to research
and write about, will result in more valuable findings, and will sustain your
enthusiasm for an extended period of time. If you feel compelled to choose
a topic about which you have a strong moral or ethical opinion, be careful
to gather materials that express opinions on all sides so that your own bi-
ases do not overwhelm the paper. The topic you choose must also be rel-
evant to the themes, questions, or issues addressed in your course. Review-
ing your class notes or speaking to your instructor about a topic raised in
class or readings will help you select a topic that will contribute specific
knowledge to the course. After selecting a topic, ask yourself the following
questions:
Is the topic sufficiently focused and narrow? If not, you might not be able to do justice to the
topic in the prescribed length or scope of the assignment.
4
Is the topic feasible? If there are not likely to be enough sources available, or if you do not
have the necessary technical or language skills, think about another topic.
Does the topic have enough originality and probative value? Because the key purpose of writing a
history essay is to put forward an argument, a topic about which a lot has been written or
about which there is no debate might not lend itself to these goals. The topic should
contribute to existing scholarship and should not be excessively petty.
Can I use the subject to demonstrate my ability to research, interpret, organize, and convey important
ideas? These, in addition to a good writing style and presentation, are the aspects of the
paper that professors are evaluating.
If the answer to any of these questions is “no”, consider revising your topic
or choosing a new one. Most people will select and reject several topics
before finding one that meets all of these criteria.
Formulating Research Questions
After choosing your topic, develop one or two questions that you must
answer in order to make a contribution to knowledge in the subject area.
Preparing such questions in advance, even though they are likely to change
as you perform your research, will help you choose appropriate sources,
read them more effectively, and avoid the tendency merely to narrate facts
and events with no specific purpose in mind. It is important that your re-
search questions are able to be answered using proper historical research
techniques. They should also reflect the time period and subject being
studied in order to avoid the appearance of anachronism, modern preju-
dice, moral judgement, or bias.
Good research questions are open-ended (rather than having simple yes-
no answers) and have the potential to offer multi-faceted answers. Begin-
ning research questions with phrases such as “To what extent,” “How
did,” or “why did” are helpful ways to accomplish these goals. Because
history uses an inductive rather than a deductive method, avoid questions
are that framed as hypotheses subject to testing.
Finding Sources
After arriving at your topic and principal research questions it is time to
look for appropriate source materials. Remember to use the range and
number of sources required by your instructor. Many history essays will
require the use of both primary and secondary sources and can be re-
searched using tertiary sources.
Primary sources are documents or artifacts that were written or created in
the time you are studying. They can be manuscripts (handwritten), which
5
are sometimes transcribed and assembled into digital collections or books;
typed, unpublished documents (such as letters and memoranda); or pub-
lished documents (such as novels or court cases), which are sometimes
available as, or assembled into, books. Primary sources are not always easy
to find and sometimes their availability will help to determine or narrow
your project. The internet is sometimes a good place to look for primary
sources, provided that they come from a reliable institution.
Examples of Primary Sources
Diaries and journals
Newspapers and magazines
Census data and statistics
Fictional literature (poetry, novels, and plays)
Non-fictional literature (scholarly treatises, propaganda, conduct books)
Official records (memoranda, position papers, charters, court cases)
Artifacts (coins, stamps, maps)
Secondary sources are scholars’ interpretations of primary sources or cri-
tiques of other scholars’ ideas. Secondary sources can be found in univer-
sity and public libraries and the internet using search engines such as
JSTOR and Historical Abstracts, which may be accessed through the Univer-
sity of Calgary library website.
Examples of Secondary Sources
Journal articles provide the results of research on a focused subject
Monographs are books that address, in detail, a single subject
Edited collections are essays bound in a book covering a single subject
Book reviews are historians’ critiques of monographs and collections
Tertiary sources summarize, consolidate, or identify primary and second-
ary sources but do not offer original testimony or conclusions. They can
help with locating materials on your topic quickly and efficiently.
Examples of Tertiary Sources
Tables of contents
Indexes
Concordances (lists of words used in bodies of work)
Databases (often located through library websites)
Encyclopedia entries
Timelines
Footnotes and bibliographies (useful for citation-mining in order to find relevant)
Evaluating Printed and Internet Sources
Always evaluate the usefulness of a source before devoting too much time
to reading it. Poor sources often lack the academic rigour that is present in
better sources and their use can result in weak argumentation and errors
of fact or interpretation.
6
Examples of Poor Sources
Popular history (works written by amateurs or published by non-academic presses)
Textbooks and class lecture notes (these works are not well referenced)
Encyclopedia and dictionaries (good for facts but not analysis)
Works with obvious biases that are unsupported by reputable historical evidence
Personal web sites or sites that come from a commercial institution
Works that do not look scholarly or professional (no notes or poor quality)
Examples of Better Sources
Works whose argument is still relevant (it has not become outdated or superseded by
more recent scholarship)
Books or journals published by university presses or other academic presses
(these works have been reviewed by other scholars prior to publication)
Works with extensive notes and/or bibliographies
Internet sources from reliable institutions
Students must be extremely cautious when seeking information on the in-
ternet. Be wary of websites from interest groups, such as those that pro-
mote wildlife preservation, holocaust denial, certain political parties or in-
dividuals, and even certain types of news. Just because the opinions ex-
pressed on these sites are published, this does not make them true or reli-
able. Reliable internet sites are usually (though not always) those with ex-
tensions such as .edu (an educational institution) and .ca, .uk, and .gov
(material deriving from Canadian, British, and American governments).
Major news outlets, such as CNN, BBC, CBC, etcetera, are likely to be
objective, but you should verify all information you get from these sites.
Avoid sites ending in .com, as these are commercial sites that can be pur-
chased by anybody. Never reference Wikipedia or similar online sources
unless this is explicitly allowed in the assignment. Material that appears
elsewhere in print (especially academic journal articles) should be cited in-
stead of the electronic version. When in doubt, ask your instructor about
using internet sources.
Interrogating Sources
In addition to evaluating the overall quality and value of a source, it is also
necessary to interrogate sources, or ask a series of questions about them.
Reading historical sources presents challenges for historians because they
are not always (or even usually) objective accounts of the past. In order to
use the source effectively and account for its limitations, it is necessary to
interrogate each source by asking and answering a series of questions. As
a starting point, for each source ask the “five W’s”:
Who wrote the source?
When was the source created?
Why was the source created?
Where was the source created?
What does the source reveal about historical events?